If you want your own private bathtub with running hot waters and candle light, you may have to re-think your backpacking trip a bit.  But if you don't mind taking a quick standing shower in a crampy box, then staying in a hostel  is a affordable way to enjoy your traveling.  You will be sharing a room with other people from all over the world, which makes you realize that the world is pretty huge.  You may strike a conversation, and from that, a new friendship is born.  Your new-found enemies are bed bugs and to a lesser degree, people's snoring while you are trying to fall asleep after a long day.    But trust me, after all is said and done, hostels really do make the backpacking trip a more interesting memory.

I was a bit lucky for my trip, as it turned out, I had friends and long-lost relatives in the cities that I planned to travel.  I was able to crash at their place for the majority of the trip.  Nonetheless, I stayed in hostels when I was in Amsterdam, Venice, and Rome.  I made new friends at all the places.  


Finding and booking
===================
One of the most important strategies to good traveling is to stay right in the middle of the action.  If you have to pay a few extra euros for a hostel close to downtown, or central to all the activities, by all means, spend the money.  It's like living in the suburbs and living in the city:  the first is cheaper, but boring, while the latter costs more, but exciting.  Use Google Maps and common sense to decide which hostel to stay.  If the town is new to you, you should spend sometime familiarizing yourself with the map, general landmarks and directions.  Pay attention to metro stations, or at least bus stops, close to the hostel since you can save time walking (and precious stamina), and have more time to visit places.

Search for keywords like "Venice, Italy hostels" on Google Maps, you'll see the city map, and the locations of the hostels.  You should be able to pick out the general places where you want to stay.  Most hostels now have online websites, or online reservation forms.  Sometimes, the online services will charge a few more euros for the booking fees, which adds up to the room rate.  The rate is ranging from 25€ to 40€ per night, and even though I've heard of cheaper rates of 15€.

You can use your Visa or Master card to place a reservation, but most places will ask you to pay cash for the room.  Personally I'd prefer paying cash for the room, since it's no string-attached.  You can just drop of the key at check-out and leave freely, knowing that your card is safe and there won't be any extra surprising charges later on.  Checking-in is usually very simple.  You fill out a form, they check your ID or passport, then you pay and they'll give you the key.  Voila, you'll be crashing on your bed in a few minutes.  But you know you will be out on the streets right after.  Who has time to sleep?And if you stay for more than a few nights, it doesn't hurt to ask the reception for a discount.


Staying
=======
Most hostels have shared rooms.  If you travel in a group, you may be able to be get a private room for a bit more money.  It's a trade-off, your privacy or your money.  Places I stayed have anywhere from 4 to 8 beds in a room.  Usually I was given a clean sheet to use as blanket.  The beds were okay, at least I did not wake up and felt like my back was snapped in half.  

Going backpacking means you will have to sleep simply, and fast, preferably before other people to avoid suffering from other people snoring.  After a day of walking and traveling, most people will sleep very soundly, pun intended.  I was once sleeping in a bed between 2 other people.  It was like a concert of snoring, in stereo, with both of them taking turn with every breath.  I was up till 4:00AM.

You will also find yourself in dark room full of people sleeping and their stuff on the floor, together with your own.  A small flashlight will come handy.  LED ones are fine since they are small, compact, and quite bright, and cost only a few bucks at the store.  I bought a cord-lock LED light by Black Crater (http://www.rei.com/product/780350).  It barely weight anything (0.3oz, or 8g) and I attached it to the main cord, giving me an extra tightening stop for the backpack.  

The hostel may or may not provide you a towel, so having one of your own comes very handy.  Towel usually takes time to dry up, if you carry a regular towel (instead of quick dry, microfiber one) with you, and the hostel offers free towel, then use theirs so that you can keep your stuff dry.  And don't forget to bring a towel with you to the bathroom.  I had to walk out all wet once, since I was so used to having my towel already in the bathroom.  It was like living in a college dorm all over again.

If possible, you should also look for a bed with a strategic location to the outlet.  You will have to charge your phone, your cameras, your iPod, and other gadgets at night.  Being close to the outlet means you can keep an eye on your toys better.


Enjoy the experience safely
===========================
Staying at a hostel means you will lose your privacy, thus you should always be aware of your important belongings:  wallet, money, passport, and other documents.  You start a conversation, then someone stops by your bed to talk.  Next thing you know, your wallet is gone, and so is that someone, whose name you barely know.  Be friendly and approachable, but trust noone.  Your goal should be to take care of yourself and be 100% self-reliant, and with that said, always keep an alerted eye.  Luckily, most people are honest and friendly.  They have to worry about the same thing as you do.  You should also have faiths in humanity too.

I put my wallet deep underneath the pillow where my head is.  I only sleep in one posture: up right, and I never move during the night.  4 years of college has trained me to not roll off the bed, since that can be an unpleasant 6-feet fall to the ground.  If anybody tries to reach in to steal something, I'd be able to feel their presence.  But the most effective way is to tell yourself and your subconscious mind that you need to be alerted, even during sleep.  You are now in the middle of the wild world, with unknown risks and dangers.  You will find that your subconscious mind will work in your favor to protect yourself, and your level of alertness is heightened.

You should ask the hostel for free locker to store the backpack, or at least your important documents.  Remember to bring a combo lock so that you don't have to waste time locating one.  Some hostels try to sell you the lock, some let you borrow it with a deposit (usually 10€).  And in the case the hostel does not have free lockers, having your own lock means you can even secure the backpack during the night.  The goal is to be safe and 100% self-reliant, right?

You should also keep your footprint as small as possible, e.g. clean up, re-pack any loose items right away.  The only 2 things I lost during the trip were my toothbrush (forgot in Amsterdam), and my cap (forgot on the plane flying home to Chicago O'Hare).  Both times, I did not follow the "minimal foot-print" principle, and I just sheepishly woke up from a zombie state.  If you actively take care of your belongings, the chance of you losing something is much less.  Put stuff back into the backpack as soon as you are done with it.  The consequence of forgetting things makes your trip a lot less enjoyable.  Imagine what happens if you forget the camera's charger, or the phone charger.  Do yourself a favor and before going to bed, put everything back into the backpack, and secure it if necessary.  And before you leave, perform a mental and visual check of the room:  underneath your bed, under the pillow and blanket, area close to the outlet, your wallet, your passport, etc..  There is no room, literally, for errors.  Things get lost the moment you are careless, or not paying attention, so tell yourself to keep an eye out.  Make your subconscious work for you.

Bed bugs
========
Bed bugs deserve their own subheading.  As I'm writing this guide, I'm still suffering from them a week after getting back.  They are the MOST annoying enemies of your trip, and after that as well.  

Most guide will tell you to watch out for bed bugs, but if you have never seen a bed bug in your life, you may not be aware of them.  I was pretty naive, and saw the first bed bug in my life at a ripe young age of 24, in Venice.  I was laying on my bed, reading about Venice, then I noticed something crawling on the wall, about 1 feet away from me.  It was brownish (a sign of people's blood), about the size of a lady bug, and leasurely crawling up the wall.  I asked my new friend from Spain on the bed next by.  She took a look, and not knowing anything better, replied "oh, probably nothing, just young beetles."  I still had bite marks till now, as both my underarms were the late night buffet for those suckers.

Before your trip, you should do research about bed bugs.  Here's the photo of the hateful face:  http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_IH9A-1Sbod8/SAypLyliH_I/AAAAAAAACXg/UjdId3_vJj0/s400/bed-bug.jpg or http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bedbug.  You should check for the bugs underneath the bed cover, at the corners and seams of the mattress.  If you find any of them around, don't even think about put down your backpack -- switch room immediately.  And remember to sleep in your own sleeping cover always.  The annoyances of getting bites are just too much.


My experiences: Amsterdam
=========================
I arrived in Amsterdam about 4pm in the afternoon, on a Saturday (09/12/2009).  On the train I made 2 new friends, who also happened to be from Chicago.  They had reserved their beds at a hostel close to Centraal Station, and since I haven't got a place to stay, I decided to go along.  Being a busy Saturday, with some conferences going on, all the hostels I saw while walking hung the "no vacancy" signs up.  Not a good sign.  The hostel where my friends stayed was also full, and I was recommended to check out the "HotelRunners" (http://www.hotelrunners.com/) to find me a free room.  The office is just down the street, Warmoesstraat.  I got a room for 40€/night for 2 nights.  My friends said they got 30€/night for each of them at the other hostel.  10€ difference wasn't too bad, however 40€/night was a bit pricy to pay for a hostel.  But this is the beautiful Amsterdam, and the location where I stayed is the heart of the Red Light District (which I only discovered later on that night).

The hostel, it turned out, is the other side of the HotelRunners office.  Walked through a tiny door in the office and it was the hostel.  Strange. The place is called "Win Hostel" and run by a Chinese family.  I got a top bed in a room, bed #6 out of 8.  The room smelled like crap with the pungent smells of cigarettes, and probably marijuana smokes mixed together in an air-tight room, stuffed by countless travelers who came and went.  Amsterdam banned indoor smoking a while back, but it takes time for the bad smokes to go away.  I were only there for 2 nights, so it didn't bother me too much.  I threw the thick Lonely Planet guide on the bed, stuff my backpack into the locker, and 15 minutes later on my way out to explore the city.  I remember how great it was to be able to breath in the fresh air outside the hostel, even though the air were full of the distinctive smell from the near by coffee shops.

I had a great night hanging out with my new friends.  We went to visit the Heineken brewery and I quickly got drunk to celebrate my arrival at Amsterdam.  I got back to the room around midnight and it was dark.  I had put the tiny flashlight out, so I was able to find my stuff, get changed, and crashed for the night.  I slept surprisingly well and didn't notice anyone snoring.  Probably if anyone snored, it was me.  My first night in Amsterdam was smooth and good.  

The room magically got filled up with people during the night.  I was one of the early risers.  I found out that there were 1 puny toilette and 2 bathrooms inside the room, which was very cool since I didn't have to go far to take a shower.  The shower room, as expected, was small and cramped.  But I was happy to have hot water running down my head to my toes, washing away all the sweats and dirts of the previous night.  It was my first shower in Amsterdam, and I know I was having the time of my life.


If Amsterdam is in your list of places to visit (you should), then it's advisable to book the hotel a head of time, especially you are to arrive at the weekend.  During busy time, you may get the response of "we're full", got panicked, and jump on the first hostel that have vacant rooms, even with a higher rate.  Essentially your chance of getting a cheap place to stay is reduced to the first hostels that still have vacancy.



€